SINGAPORE -- The Singaporean government on Wednesday forecast a growth rate of 3% to 5% for 2022, predicting a continued rebound from COVID-19 as global borders gradually reopen and domestic restrictions ease.

The projected expansion, however, is slower than this year's forecast of "around 7%" -- a slight upgrade from the previous "6% to 7%" projection, after a 5.4% contraction in 2020.

The recovery of various sectors in 2022 "is expected to remain uneven," the Ministry of Trade and Industry said in its quarterly economic update. "The growth prospects for outward-oriented sectors remain strong given robust external demand," but "the recovery of the aviation- and tourism-related sectors is likely to be gradual as global travel demand will take time to recover and travel restrictions could persist in key visitor source markets."

The ministry also said on Wednesday that gross domestic product for the three months through September expanded 7.1% on the year, up from the 6.5% rate in the preliminary data released last month. Manufacturing and a rebound in the services sector supported the growth.

While Singapore's full vaccination rate hit 80% in late August, the city-state has faced a surge of coronavirus cases, setting a daily record of over 5,000 last month. But the vast majority of infections have been mild or asymptomatic, and the wave appears to have peaked: Monday's new infections totaled 1,461, the lowest in two months.

Looking ahead, "despite the relative high base data in 2021, Singapore’s economy is expected to stay underpinned by the favorable export and manufacturing sectors," said Barnabas Gan, an economist at Singapore's United Overseas Bank, which projects a 3.5% growth rate for 2022.

The country is also progressively extending its "vaccinated travel lane" program -- launched in September to allow fully inoculated visitors to enter without quarantining -- to major economies in Europe and North America.

Neighboring countries are starting to reopen their borders as well -- a welcome development for Singapore, which has long positioned itself as a hub for business and leisure travel.

Domestically, starting this Monday, the government eased some of its COVID-19 restrictions, allowing groups of up to five fully vaccinated people to dine at restaurants.

Authorities expect more economic activity to resume globally in 2022. But the government also noted some downside risks, such as the uncertain COVID-19 situation, China's economic slowdown and protracted global supply chain disruptions.

It also warned of rising energy commodity prices, leading to inflation. "This could in turn result in an earlier or larger increase in interest rates than anticipated, thereby triggering a tightening of global financial conditions." Singapore's central bank tightened its policy in October for the first time in three years.

Singapore is a high-income economy with a gross national income of US$54,530 per capita, as of 2017. The country provides one of the world’s most business-friendly regulatory environment for local entrepreneurs and is ranked among the world’s most competitive economies.

In the decades after independence, Singapore rapidly developed from a low-income country to a high-income country. GDP growth in the city-state has been amongst the world’s highest, at an average of 7.7% since independence and topping 9.2% in the first 25 years.

After rapid industrialization in the 1960s catapulted the island nation’s development trajectory, manufacturing became the main driver of growth. In the early 1970s, Singapore reached full employment and joined the ranks of Hong Kong SAR, Republic of Korea, and Taiwan a decade later as Asia’s newly industrializing economies. The manufacturing and services sectors remain the twin pillars of Singapore’s high value-added economy.

The overall growth of the Singapore economy was 3.2% in 2018. Value-added manufacturing, particularly in the electronics and precision engineering sectors, remain key drivers of growth, as are the services sector, particularly the information and communications industries, which grew 6.0% year-on-year, and the finance & insurance industries, which grew 5.9% year-on-year.  Economic growth is expected to moderate in 2019, with the government forecasting a range of 1.5% to 3.5%, projecting the rate to be slightly below the middle of the forecast range.

In 2017, Singapore launched the regional finance hub ‘Asia’s Infrastructure Exchange’: “the go-to place where infrastructure demand and supply can connect, where infrastructure expertise and financing can be obtained and infrastructure needs are met.” In its announcement, the government highlighted the country’s strong ecosystem, one that integrates infrastructure players along the whole value chain – multilateral banks, private financiers, lawyers, accountants, engineers and other professional services.

In the most recent World Bank Human Capital Index, Singapore ranks the best country in the world in human capital development. This means that a child born today in Singapore will be 88% as productive when she grows up, as if she enjoyed complete education and full health. Together with strong financial support from the government, the country continues to strengthen the nimbleness and flexibility of its workforce by providing continuing education such as the Skillsfuture initiative. Government spending on continuing education will nearly double, to more than S$1 billion yearly. 

SINGAPORE, Feb 17 (Reuters) - Singapore maintained its forecast for the economy to expand 3-5% this year as the city-state's recovery from the pandemic slump continues, although officials flagged downside risks to global growth and rising inflationary pressures.

The global economic recovery faces risks from mounting price pressures due to supply chain disruptions and rising energy costs amid tensions involving Russia and Ukraine, even as the pandemic appears to abate.

Gross domestic product (GDP) grew 6.1% year-on-year in the fourth quarter, the Ministry of Trade and Industry (MTI) said, slightly higher than the 5.9% growth in the government's advance estimate.

Analysts had expected a 6.2% increase, according to a Reuters poll.

For the full year 2021, GDP grew 7.6% versus an initial 7.2% estimate and a 4.1% contraction in 2020. Last year's growth was the highest in a decade.

On a quarter-on-quarter seasonally-adjusted basis, the economy expanded 2.3% in the fourth quarter.

Singapore's economic recovery has been led by the trade-related and manufacturing sectors, but activity in industries exposed to tourism, aviation and consumers are expected to remain below pre-COVID levels even by the end of 2022.

"Global supply bottlenecks remain and are expected to persist throughout the first half of 2022, thereby constraining industrial production and GDP growth in the near term," said Gabriel Lim, permanent secretary for trade and industry.

"Persistent supply bottlenecks, alongside rising energy prices due to geopolitical tensions, have also exacerbated global inflationary pressures," he said.

Output of the construction sector was expected to remain below pre-pandemic levels throughout 2022.

However, bolstered by high vaccination rates, Singapore is loosening border measures and easing local restrictions, in moves that will likely support the recovery of lagging sectors. read more

The Monetary Authority of Singapore tightened its policy settings in January in its first out-of-cycle move in seven years. It is widely expected to tighten again at its scheduled policy meeting in April.

"For monetary policy purposes, we assess that the balance of risk is still tipped towards inflation," said Edward Robinson, Deputy Managing Director at the MAS. The central bank will release its next review on its monetary policy in April as scheduled, he said.

He affirmed the 2022 core inflation forecast at 2-3% and headline inflation at 2.5–3.5%.

The forecast does not include any impact from a looming Goods and Services Tax (GST) hike, the timing for which is likely to be announced at the budget on Friday. read more

Separate data on Thursday showed Singapore's January non-oil domestic exports (NODX) rose 17.6% from a year earlier, beating expectations.

"We expect growth momentum to slow sequentially in H1 2022, amid a more protracted reopening due to the Omicron wave and rising inflationary pressures," said Priyanka Kishore and Sung-Eun Jung at Oxford Economics.

"We also expect further monetary tightening and a return to conservative fiscal policies this year," they added in a research note.

Highlights
• The global economy expanded by 5.3% in 2021, marking a strong rebound
from the COVID-induced contraction of 3.0% in 2020. The major advanced
economies (AEs) have recovered more rapidly than emerging market
economies (EMEs). This mainly reflected AEs’ more generous macro policy
support, and their greater robustness to repeated virus infection waves,
attendant on more rapid vaccination deployments. However, the emergence
of a range of supply frictions in conjunction with the strength of demand
contributed to a rise in global inflation to 2.8%, the highest since 2011.
• Global growth is projected to remain above trend in 2022 as the recovery
from the pandemic matures and supply frictions are gradually overcome.
GDP growth is forecast at 4.4% in 2022. Virus outbreaks are expected to
continue to weigh on activity in 2022 but with diminishing effect, as more
countries strengthen vaccine provision and transit to an endemic phase. The
hindrance to activity from supply constraints may be nearing its peak.
• Global inflation is expected to rise further to 3.3% in 2022, before moderating
in 2023. Price pressures have intensified most sharply in the AEs, reflecting
their stronger and more front-loaded demand recoveries. Further, the
resolution of supply problems has lagged the pickup in demand. Inflation in
Asia ex-Japan is forecast to increase more modestly given still-negative
output gaps in many regional economies. Global inflation is projected to
ease towards central bank target ranges in 2023 as demand and supply
progressively re-equilibrate.
• There is considerable uncertainty around the global macroeconomic
outlook, with the trajectory of the pandemic remaining a risk. The emergence
of new, vaccine-resistant COVID-19 strains could trigger more public health
measures, weigh on demand, and exacerbate supply constraints.
Geopolitical tensions constitute another risk that could manifest through
supply interruptions (for example if energy producers are affected), or by
damaging confidence. Inflation could be higher or more persistent than
expected if medium-term inflation expectations drift upwards.
• Persistent positive inflation surprises could trigger a sharp tightening in
global financial conditions. Coupled with prevailing vulnerabilities such as
elevated debt levels and stretched asset valuations, the risk of a disorderly
market correction has grown. Nevertheless, Asian EMEs are in a better
2
position to weather financial market volatility due to improvement in their
external balances over the years.
• The Singapore economy grew at a creditable pace of 2.3% q-o-q SA in Q4
2021, bringing the full year expansion to 7.6%. GDP growth in Q4 was largely
driven by continued strength in the external-facing sectors, particularly
manufacturing. Singapore’s economic recovery is set to become more
broad-based in 2022. Stronger growth should extend to the domesticoriented and travel-related sectors, as high vaccination and booster rates
allow for the gradual easing of domestic safe management measures and
border restrictions, and in turn more economic activities to resume. Barring
fresh disruptions, GDP growth is projected to come in at 3–5% in 2022.
• The labour market continued to recover over H2, with resident employment
registering robust growth. Meanwhile, inflows of non-resident workers
remained largely impeded by COVID-related border restrictions, even as
some recovery occurred in Q4. On the whole, the domestic labour market
showed signs of tightening in tandem with the strong economic recovery.
The resident unemployment rate declined and was close to its pre-pandemic
level in December and wage growth remained firm in Q3. The quick pace of
employment expansion is expected to persist into H1 this year as both
resident and non-resident workforces expand on the back of firm business
hiring intentions. Resident wage growth is expected to pick up even as
progressively greater inflows of non-resident workers alleviate the labour
shortages in some sectors.
• Both CPI-All Items and MAS Core Inflation rose further in Q4 2021, reflecting
an increase in underlying inflation momentum and a broadening of price
pressures. Core inflation picked up on the back of higher services and food
inflation, and is expected to rise further over H1 2022 as services inflation
strengthens in tandem with the tightening labour market and pickup in
private consumption. Core and headline inflation are forecast to ease in H2
as external inflation drivers recede but risks remain on the upside. For 2022
as a whole, MAS Core Inflation is forecast to come in within 2–3%, up from
0.9% last year. Meanwhile, CPI-All Items inflation is projected to average
2.5–3.5%, following the 2.3% outturn in 2021.
• Macroeconomic policy has shifted pre-emptively in line with the evolving
cyclical developments of the economy. In an unscheduled policy
announcement in January 2022, MAS raised the rate of appreciation of the
S$NEER policy band slightly, in light of the significant shift in the inflation
outlook. This further adjustment, which followed the pre-emptive policy
move in October 2021, is appropriate for ensuring medium-term price
stability. While fiscal policy ensured that there would be continuing targeted
support for vulnerable businesses and households amid the ongoing cost
pressures, the focus of Budget 2022 has clearly shifted towards facilitating
the transformation of the economy and building a fairer and more resilient
tax system.


SINGAPORE'S retail sales rose 8.7 per cent year on year in March, reversing the previous month's decrease of 3.5 per cent - coming as a surprise to economists as market consensus came in at a much slower 0.7 per cent growth prediction. 

The increase in March was attributed partly to larger growth in industries such as computer and telecommunications equipment, wearing apparel and footwear, as well as cosmetics, toiletries and medical goods, said the Department of Statistics (SingStat) on Thursday (May 5).

The advance in retail sales suggests that Singapore’s domestic retail environment has improved in tandem with a tighter labour market and is consistent with the uptick in other high-frequency data suggesting that the Republic’s economic growth remains resilient in 2022, said UOB economist Barnabas Gan.

“For the year ahead, we expect that domestic retailers will likely see some support as borders continue to reopen, while further economic recovery would be a linchpin for domestic retail demand. Barring the exacerbation of Covid-19-related risks in Singapore and around the region, we pencil retail sales to expand by 6 per cent in 2022,” Gan noted.

Potential front-loading of consumer purchases this year could also help retail sales as consumers adjust for the higher goods and services tax in 2023, he added.
March’s retail sales grew much stronger than anticipated, and sales remained brisk even as faster inflation was expected to dent some demand, said Nicholas Mapa, senior economist at ING.

The “upside surprise” suggests that Q1 gross domestic product could be revised higher as sales remained robust despite a pickup in inflation, he added.

On a month-on-month seasonally adjusted basis, total retail sales were up 7.5 per cent. The total retail sales value was S$3.9 billion, with online sales accounting for 14.9 per cent.

Most retail segments saw year-on-year growth in March, except for motor vehicles, recreational goods, optical goods and books, as well as mini-marts and convenience stores. Motor vehicles saw the biggest fall of 14.1 per cent year on year.

The top 5 segments that saw the highest year-on-year growth are:

Computer and telecommunications equipment (27.3 per cent)
Wearing apparel and footwear (25.8 per cent)
Cosmetics, toiletries and medical goods (25.2 per cent)
Petrol service stations (23.9 per cent)
Food and alcohol (19.6 per cent)

Excluding motor vehicles, retail sales were up 13.4 per cent year on year, and up 8.3 per cent on a month-on-month seasonally adjusted basis.

Food and beverage services (F&B) rose 4.7 per cent year on year, with the total sales value at $806 million. Sales for food caterers saw the highest increase of 50.3 per cent.

Singapore started easing most of its Covid restrictions from Mar 29, while border restrictions started easing from Apr 1. 

CIMB economist Song Seng Wun noted that as people are able to gather in larger groups and travel more freely, retail sales will increase in the coming months with more consumer spending, especially for the F&B sector.

On a month-on-month seasonally adjusted basis, all categories recorded growth, except cosmetics, toiletries and medical goods, which remained unchanged. 

However, there are risks posed by global ongoings, such as the Russia-Ukraine conflict which brings downside to growth and an increased inflation outlook, thus dampening the recovery in consumption demand, Gan said.

“Higher inflation rates especially led by crude oil and food (which may be made worse by geopolitical developments) may continue to lift retail prices especially in H1 2022, underlining some nominal price effects for the subsequent readings," he noted.

With inflation expected to accelerate in the near term, ING's Mapa believes that retail sales growth may eventually lose some momentum.

“A projected slowdown in global trade could also weigh on consumer sentiment, yet another factor that could dampen retail sales in the near term,” he added.