https://www.cnbc.com/2022/05/12/uk-economy-only-going-to-get-worse-as-growth-slowdown-begins.html

Europe Economy
UK economy 'only going to get worse' as growth slowdown begins
Published Thu, May 12 20225:43 AM EDT
Elliot Smith@ElliotSmithCNBC
WATCH LIVE
Key Points
A growth slowdown is underway in the U.K. after the economy shrank by 0.1% in March, with economists expecting further contractions this year.
The surprise monthly contraction presents a worry for Prime Minister Boris Johnson's government as the country's cost-of-living crisis is yet to reach its peak.
Sterling hit a two-year low versus the U.S. dollar following the GDP data as traders digested growing uncertainty about the U.K.'s economic outlook.
The U.K. economy shrank by 0.1% in March and the situation is expected to worsen as the country's cost-of-living crisis escalates.
Tim Ireland | Xinhua News Agency | Getty Images
LONDON — A growth slowdown is underway in the U.K. after the economy shrank by 0.1% in March, with economists expecting further contractions this year.

Although the economy grew 0.8% for the first quarter as a whole, slightly below consensus forecasts for 1% growth, January was the only positive month of the quarter. The war in Ukraine and subsequent supply chain problems and energy price spikes have compounded the toll of inflation, which is running at a multi-decade high.

Sterling hit a two-year low versus the U.S. dollar following the data as traders digested growing uncertainty about the U.K.'s economic outlook.

The surprise monthly contraction in March — economists had expected the figure to come in flat — presents a worry for Prime Minister Boris Johnson's government as the country's cost-of-living crisis is yet to reach its peak.

"Ultimately, things are only going to get worse for consumers. Energy bills are expected to soar again later this year when the price cap is reassessed, while inflation is proving stickier than expected," said Hinesh Patel, portfolio manager at Quilter Investors.

U.K inflation hit a 30-year high of 7% in March and in April, the country's energy regulator increased its price cap by 54% to accommodate soaring prices. In the Queen's Speech to mark the state opening of parliament on Wednesday, the government promised to focus on economic growth in order to address the spiraling cost of living.

VIDEO3:3803:38
Strategist: Why the UK economy is 'one of the most vulnerable' in the world
Squawk Box Europe
Patel added that the Bank of England now faces a "near impossible task of managing the economy out of this quagmire."

"They are in aggressive rate raising mode for now, but this cannot remain the case for long given the economic issues already starting to play out," he added.

The Bank of England has hiked interest rates at four consecutive policy meetings as it looks to rein in inflation, and markets are pricing in another five hikes by spring of 2023.

However, James Smith, developed markets economist at ING, suggested that the central bank's more cautious tone in recent weeks indicates that it will not meet these expectations, and may settle for a couple more hikes before hitting pause so as not to exert further downward pressure on economic growth.

Thursday's GDP figures also showed that the U.K.'s dominant consumer-facing services industry took a substantial hit in March, falling 1.8% as consumer spending declined amid the squeeze on households.

Health spending to fall away
ING's Smith said a second consecutive decline in output should be expected in April, coinciding with the end of free Covid-19 testing.

"Surprisingly, health output actually increased in March despite the ongoing wind-down of Covid-related activities, but clearly, that's unlikely to last," Smith noted.

VIDEO4:2204:22
If inflation data starts to turn that will give us a big bounce in the markets, says Jim O'Neill
Squawk on the Street
"Health spending has been a key driver of GDP through the pandemic, and in fact, the overall size of the economy would be around 1% smaller had output in this sector stayed flat since early-2020."

Caroline Simmons, U.K. chief investment officer at UBS Global Wealth Management, was also cautious looking ahead.

"There is growing potential for U.K. GDP to be negative in the second quarter, which is in part due to the consumer squeeze from energy price rises," she said.

U.K. stocks insulated
As concerns about the growth outlook in the coming quarters grow, investors are also considering the impact it could have on markets.

However, Simmons noted that the U.K. economy is not representative of the U.K. equity market. UBS sees upside to the FTSE 100 index with a December target of 8,100; the FTSE was trading around 7172 mid-morning Thursday.

Importantly for the U.K., both labor demand and business investment intentions remain firm, reducing the risk of a sharp downturn in overall growth, according to Daniel Casali, chief investment strategist at Tilney Smith & Williamson.

VIDEO2:5602:56
BOE chief economist says biggest drivers of UK inflation are external shocks
Street Signs Europe
The Bank of England expects growth to be flat in the second quarter, though Casali also noted that there is potential for a modest contraction.

"For investors, given that the large cap U.K.-listed companies derive the bulk of their sales abroad, it really is global growth that matters," Casali added.

The IMF recently reduced its global growth forecast to 3.6% for 2022 and 2023, from 6.1% last year.

"Along with the sharp EPS gains made by the energy sector, the outlook for UK company profits has improved. The consensus forecasts 15% Earnings Per Share growth for 2022, a big pick-up from just under 3% at the start of the year," Casali added.

"At the very least, rising company earnings (and cheap valuations) should limit U.K. equity downside in current volatile market conditions."

https://www.reuters.com/world/uk/uk-economy-shrinks-march-grows-08-q1-2022-05-12/

UK economy shrinks in March as recession risks mount
By David Milliken
and William Schomberg
4 minute read
1/3
Vauxhall Astra vehicles are pictured on a production line at Vauxhall car factory in Ellesmere Port, Britain July 6, 2021. REUTERS/Phil Noble

Register now for FREE unlimited access to Reuters.com
Summary
UK GDP unexpectedly falls 0.1% in March; flat in Feb
Q1 growth of 0.8% beats U.S. and euro zone
Inflation squeeze brings fear of recession
Policy dilemma deepens for Bank of England
LONDON, May 12 (Reuters) - Britain's economy unexpectedly shrank in March, marking a weak end to the first quarter of a year when the risk of recession is looming and increasing pressure on the government to offer more support to inflation-hit households.

Gross domestic product fell 0.1% from February, hurt by a slump in car sales due to supply-chain problems, the Office for National Statistics said.

That left growth in the first three months at 0.8%, weaker than the Bank of England's 0.9% forecast and the 1.0% median forecast by economists polled by Reuters.

Register now for FREE unlimited access to Reuters.com
The January-March period is likely to mark a high point for the year, with households facing their biggest squeeze on disposable income in decades as the policy dilemma facing a BoE intent on keeping a lid on inflation - while not choking off prospects for growth altogether - deepens.

Last week, the central bank forecast inflation will surpass 10% in the final quarter of 2022, up from 7% in March, already more than three times its 2% target.

"The economy had less momentum than we thought even before the full hit from the cost of living crisis has been felt," Paul Dales, chief UK economist at Capital Economics, said. "The risk of recession has just risen."

Sterling weakened against the dollar on Thursday while British government bond yields slumped to their lowest in nearly two months.

PRESSURE FOR MORE SUPPORT
The government is under pressure to provide more support to households. Finance minister Rishi Sunak said that, while the recovery was being disrupted by Russia's invasion of Ukraine, he was open to offering more help, with regulated energy tariffs expected to rise by around 40% more in October. read more

Britain's economy outpaced the United States and the euro zone in the first quarter, although this partly reflected an earlier start and end to the Omicron wave of COVID-19, and differences in the timing of energy price rises.

The International Monetary Fund predicts Britain will see the weakest growth and highest inflation among major advanced economies next year.

Much of Britain's recovery reflects greater spending on healthcare - up 11% since the start of the pandemic - while consumer services remain 7% below their pre-pandemic level.

"Given that inflation looks set to remain red-hot for some time, how the consumer fares will remain the key question for those monitoring the UK economy for some time to come," said Sandra Horsfield, an economist at Investec.

In March alone, sales of cars and motor vehicles slumped by 15.1%, leading to a 0.2% fall in overall services output.

The fall in GDP would have been even greater had it not been for an unusually strong 1.7% rise in construction output, reflecting repair work after winter storms in February.

February's GDP growth was revised down to zero from 0.1%.

The BoE worries that slower growth will not be enough on its own to bring inflation back to its 2% target, and that the leap in inflation will get embedded in longer-term pricing plans and pay settlements.

It has therefore raised interest rates four times since December to tackle inflation pressures, and financial markets expect rates to rise to 2% by the end of this year from 1% now.

Wage pressures remained strong in April although hiring slowed, according to data overnight from recruiters, while house prices rose by the most since June, despite a big overall fall in consumer sentiment. read more

The world's fifth-biggest economy shrank by 9.3% in 2020 and grew by 7.4% in 2021, the sharpest COVID swing in output of any G7 economy. Overall GDP, on a monthly basis, is now 1.2% above its pre-COVID level of February 2020.

https://www.cnbc.com/2022/05/12/uk-economy-shrinks-in-march-grows-0point8percent-in-q1.html

Europe Economy
UK economy shrinks in March, grows 0.8% in first quarter
Published Thu, May 12 20222:27 AM EDTUpdated Thu, May 12 20222:42 AM EDT
WATCH LIVE
BOE Governor Andrew Bailey has warned the Bank is walking a "narrow path" between growth and inflation.
Bloomberg | Bloomberg | Getty Images
Britain's economy shrank by 0.1% in March but expanded by 0.8% for the first quarter of 2022 as a whole, official figures showed on Thursday in what is likely to have been a high point for 2022 as the cost of living crisis increasingly bites.

Economists polled by Reuters had on average expected gross domestic product (GDP) to be flat in March and to have grown 1.0% over the first three months of this year, compared with the final quarter of 2021.

The fall in GDP was led by a 0.2% fall in output from Britain's dominant services sector.

Britain's economy shrank by a historic 9.3% in 2020 and grew by 7.4% in 2021, the sharpest swing in output of any G7 economy during the Covid-19 pandemic.

Overall GDP, on a monthly basis is now 1.2% above its pre-COVID level in February 2020.

However economists see Britain at a growing risk of slipping back into recession, as the war in Ukraine exacerbates existing post-pandemic pressures, which the Bank of England has forecast will push inflation above 10% by the end of this year.

Prime Minister Boris Johnson's government is under political pressure to provide more support to households to tackle soaring bills for energy and other essentials which have already caused a near-record fall in consumer sentiment.

On Wednesday, Britain's National Institute of Economic and Social Research (NIESR), a think-tank, forecast British GDP would fall in the third and fourth quarters of this year, meeting the technical definition of a recession.

Last month the International Monetary Fund predicted Britain would see the weakest growth and highest inflation of any major advanced economy next year.

https://www.ons.gov.uk/economy/economicoutputandproductivity/output/articles/ukeconomylatest/2021-01-25

UK economy latest
A roundup of the latest data and analysis on the UK economy, business and jobs following Brexit and during the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic.

This page provides commentary and charts on the latest changes in the UK economy, using novel and rapid data sources as well as official statistics.

We explain the reasons behind each change as much as possible, although it can be difficult to separate the impacts of different things such as Brexit and COVID-19.

For an overview of our main economic indicators, visit our dashboard.

Latest headlines 6 May 2022

“High-contact” industries hit hardest by COVID-19 pandemic
5 May 2022
More businesses reported lower stock levels in March 2022 than higher stock levels
4 May 2022
High-income households experienced higher inflation in late 2021
29 April 2022
Continued increase in reported cost of living
28 April 2022
Business closures at highest quarterly level
Consumer behaviour measures down following Easter holidays
This page was last updated at 09:30 on 5 May 2022.

“High-contact” industries hit hardest by COVID-19 pandemic6 May 2022
In the first half of 2020, industries involving more in-person contact saw the largest fall in turnover as coronavirus (COVID-19) lockdowns came into force.

This includes wholesale and retail; transportation and storage; accommodation and food services; arts, entertainment and recreation; and other services.

These “high-contact” industries saw a relatively larger peak-to-trough decline in output of 37% in the early stages of the pandemic, compared with 17% among “low-contact” industries.

Businesses with more in-person contact saw the greatest falls in output during the COVID-19 pandemic UK, gross value added, Quarter 4 (Oct to Dec) 2019 to Quarter 4 (Oct to Dec) 2021 (Index: Q4 2019 = 100)
Source: Office for National Statistics – Quarterly National Accounts
Notes:
The maximum and minimum refer to the range of relative turnover levels for the five high-contact industries.
Download this chart Businesses with more in-person contact saw the greatest falls in output during the COVID-19 pandemic Image .csv .xls
Among “high-contact” industries, wholesale and retail trade was the least affected, with a fall in turnover of 26% in the first half of 2020.

Retail not in store, stalls or markets was an exception to this trend, seeing a rise in turnover through the first lockdown because of online shopping.

Accommodation and food services were most affected, with the largest falls among beverage-serving industries (92%) and hotel and similar accommodation (86%).

While there has been a strong recovery among the majority of “high-contact” industries, businesses in creative, arts and entertainment activities remain below pre-pandemic levels, which could reflect a lingering reluctance to attend indoor events.

Explore the latest insights on COVID-19 and lifestyle
Read our full article on the effects of the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic on “high-contact” industries
🠕 Back to the top

More businesses reported lower stock levels in March 2022 than higher stock levels5 May 2022
Businesses not permanently stopped trading were asked how their stock levels of raw materials and finished goods in March 2022 compared with February 2022.

For both raw materials and finished goods, approximately 1 in 15 businesses reported lower stock levels in March 2022 than in February 2022 Lower stock levels, businesses not permanently stopped trading, broken down by industry, weighted by count, UK, 1 March to 31 March 2022
Source: Office for National Statistics – Business Insights and Conditions Survey
Notes:
For presentational purposes, response options have been removed.
“Mining and quarrying”, “water supply, sewerage, waste management and remediation activities”, “human health and social work activities” and “arts, entertainment and recreation” industries have been removed for disclosure purposes, but their totals are included in “All industries”.
Download this chart For both raw materials and finished goods, approximately 1 in 15 businesses reported lower stock levels in March 2022 than in February 2022 Image .csv .xls
In relation to stocks of raw materials, 7% of businesses not permanently stopped trading reported that their stock levels were lower in March 2022 than in February 2022, a further 4% reported that their stock levels were higher in March 2022. Approximately a quarter (23%) of businesses reported that their stock levels had stayed the same. The remainder either reported “not sure” or “not applicable”.

For businesses reporting on their stock levels of finished goods, 6% reported lower levels and 3% reported higher levels, across the same period. Around one in five (21%) of businesses reported their stock levels had stayed the same.

Response options broken down by industry, trading status and size band, for raw material and completed stock questions can be found in the accompanying dataset.

Read our latest bulletin on Business insights and impact on the UK economy
🠕 Back to the top

High-income households experienced higher inflation in late 20214 May 2022
The Household Costs Indices are a set of measures that aim to reflect UK households’ experience of changing prices and costs. According to the latest release, high-income households experienced a higher rate of inflation than low-income households in the latter part of 2021, driven by transport costs and changes to taxes paid on property transactions.

Towards the end of 2021 both low- and high-income households experienced rises in inflation, with high-income households at 6.5% and low-income households at 5.6% in December 2021.

Owner occupiers have experienced higher inflation than renter households towards the end of 2021, driven by changes to taxes paid on property transactions.

Retired and non-retired households have experienced similar inflation throughout 2020 and 2021, with housing costs being the largest expenditure category for both types of household.

Read the full bulletin on Household Costs Indices, UK: fourth preliminary estimates, 2005 to 2021
🠕 Back to the top

Continued increase in reported cost of living29 April 2022
Around 9 in 10 (91%) adults reported their cost of living had increased in the latest period (13 to 24 April 2022). The figure was at 88% in the previous period (30 March to 10 April 2022) and continues an increase from 62% when this question was first included in the survey (3 to 14 November 2021).

The most common reasons given by those who said their living costs had increased were an increase in the price of food shopping (92%), an increase to gas or electricity bills (86%) and a rise in the cost of fuel (80%).

About 40% of those responsible for paying them said they had struggled to afford their energy bills (compared with 37% in the previous period).

One in five (20%) adults said they had been unable to buy fuel at some point in the last two weeks, compared with 8% in the previous period.

Food shopping has become more expensive for many, with 44% reporting they have had to spend more than usual to get what they normally buy. This compares with 37% in previous period.

Read the bulletin on public opinions and social trends
🠕 Back to the top

Business closures at highest quarterly level28 April 2022
The number of businesses removed from the Inter-Departmental Business Register (business closures) in the UK in Quarter 1 (Jan to Mar) 2022 was 137,210 (23%) higher than in Quarter 1 2021.

There was an increase in closures in 15 out of 16 main industrial groups in Quarter 1 2022 compared with Quarter 1 2021, with the most significant increase coming from the transport and storage industry.

The number of closures in Quarter 1 2022 is the highest Quarter 1 figure since the start of the series in 2017 and is the fourth quarter in a row where there have been more closures than creations.

The number of businesses added to the Inter-Departmental Business Register (business creations) in the UK in Quarter 1 2022 was at the same level as the number added in Quarter 1 2021.

Construction saw the most significant increase in creations in Quarter 1 2022 compared with Quarter 1 2021, while retail saw the most significant decrease.

Business closures were higher in Quarter 1 (Jan to Mar) 2022 than in any quarter since 2017 Number of businesses removed from the Inter-Departmental Business Register (IDBR), quarterly, UK, Quarter 1 2017 to Quarter 1 2022
Source: Inter-Departmental Business Register
Download this chart Business closures were higher in Quarter 1 (Jan to Mar) 2022 than in any quarter since 2017 Image .csv .xls
Read our bulletin on Business demography, quarterly experimental statistics, UK: January to March 2022
🠕 Back to the top

Consumer behaviour measures down following Easter holidays28 April 2022
Following the Easter holidays across the UK, most of the consumer behaviour measures we monitor were down in the latest week to 21 April 2022.

Consumer behaviour indicators showed falls in UK credit and debit card purchases of 9 percentage points, falls in OpenTable seated diners of 5 percentage points and falls in the number of transactions in all Pret A Manger regional categories.

Google Mobility data showed falls in all locations except for parks.. Meanwhile, visits to retail stores and recreation areas, as well as grocery and pharmacy sites, were both down 7%.

The aggregate CHAPS-based indicator of credit and debit card purchases decreased by 9 percentage points in the week to 21 April 2022 to 96% of its February 2020 average Backward-looking seven-day rolling average, 4 January 2021 to 21 April 2022, non-seasonally adjusted, nominal prices
Source: Office for National Statistics and Bank of England calculations
Download this chart The aggregate CHAPS-based indicator of credit and debit card purchases decreased by 9 percentage points in the week to 21 April 2022 to 96% of its February 2020 average Image .csv .xls
In the week to 21 April 2022, the aggregate CHAPS-based indicator of credit and debit card purchases decreased by 9 percentage points from the previous week, to 96% of its February 2020 average level.

The spending categories recorded the following changes in the latest week:

“work-related” decreased by 19 percentage points
“staple” decreased by 11 percentage points
“social” decreased by 9 percentage points
“delayable” decreased by 6 percentage points
These weekly falls are most likely because of seasonal effects, following the Easter holidays in parts of the UK and coinciding with the end of the month.

Read the latest bulletin on Economic activity and social change in the UK, real-time indicators
🠕 Back to the top

https://www.freemalaysiatoday.com/category/business/2022/05/12/uk-economy-unexpectedly-shrinks-on-recession-risks/

UK economy unexpectedly shrinks on recession risks
By
Reuters
-
May 12, 2022 5:00 PM
The BoE has raised interest rates four times since December. (Reuters pic)
LONDON: Britain’s economy unexpectedly shrank 0.1% in March after a slump in car sales due to supply-chain problems, marking a weak end to the first quarter of a year when the risk of recession is looming.

Gross domestic product grew by 0.8% in the first three months of 2022, the Office for National Statistics said – below the 0.9% forecast by the Bank of England (BoE) and the 1.0% expected on average by economists polled by Reuters.

Despite falling short of expectations, the growth between January and March is likely to mark a high point for the year, with consumer spending facing its biggest squeeze in decades.

Last week, the BoE forecast inflation will go above 10% in the final quarter of the year, up from 7% in March, which was already more than three times its 2% target.

“The economy had less momentum than we thought even before the full hit from the cost of living crisis has been felt. The risk of recession has just risen,” Paul Dales, chief UK economist at Capital Economics, said.

Prime minister Boris Johnson’s government is under pressure to provide more support to households to tackle soaring bills for energy and other essentials that have already caused a near-record fall in consumer sentiment.

“Our recovery is being disrupted by (Russian president Vladimir) Putin’s barbaric invasion of Ukraine and other global challenges, but we are continuing to help people where we can,” finance minister Rishi Sunak said following today’s data.

Consumer slump

Britain, unlike some of its European neighbours, has limited direct trade ties with Russia, but it is heavily impacted by the jump in energy prices in Europe that were already high even before the Feb 24 invasion.

The BoE has raised interest rates four times since December, and is likely to increase them further this year to tame inflation.

The world’s fifth-biggest economy shrank by a historic 9.3% in 2020 and grew by 7.4% in 2021, the sharpest swing in output of any G7 economy during the Covid-19 pandemic.

Overall GDP, on a monthly basis, is now 1.2% above its pre-Covid level of February 2020.

However, a large part of the recovery reflects greater spending on healthcare – up 11% since the start of the pandemic – while consumer services are still 7% below their pre-pandemic level.

In March alone, sales of cars and motor vehicles slumped by 15.1%, leading to a 0.2% fall in overall services output.

The fall in GDP would have been even greater had it not been for an unusually strong 1.7% rise in construction output, reflecting repair work after winter storms in February.

Yesterday, Britain’s National Institute of Economic and Social Research, a think-tank, forecast GDP would fall in the third and fourth quarters, meeting the technical definition of a recession.

Last month, the International Monetary Fund predicted Britain would see the weakest growth and highest inflation of any major advanced economy next year.