https://www.cnbc.com/2022/05/13/us-bonds-treasury-prices-slip-as-investors-pile-back-into-stocks.html

U.S. Treasury prices slip as investors pile back into stocks
Published Fri, May 13 20224:46 AM EDTUpdated 3 Min Ago
[Image: thumbnail]

Vicky McKeever@vmckeevercnbc
WATCH LIVE
Key Points
U.S. Treasury prices slipped on Friday, seeing yields jump, as investors sold out of government bonds and looked to move back into stock markets.
Throughout the week, investors appear to have rotated out of stocks and into Treasurys in search of a safe haven, as persistently high inflation data has fueled recession fears.
U.S. Treasury prices slipped on Friday, seeing yields jump, as investors sold out of government bonds and looked to move back into stock markets.

The yield on the benchmark 10-year Treasury note surged 9 basis points to 2.9131% at 4:15 a.m. ET. The yield on the 30-year Treasury bond climbed 9 basis points to 3.0704%. Yields move inversely to prices and 1 basis point is equal to 0.01%.

Treasurys

U.S. stock futures jumped in early trading on Friday, with markets seeking to avoid falling into bear territory, after heavy selling in recent days.

Throughout the week, investors appear to have rotated out of stocks and into Treasurys in search of a safe haven, as persistently high inflation data has fueled recession fears.

Federal Reserve President Jerome Powell said in an interview with Marketplace on Thursday that he couldn't guarantee a "soft landing" for the economy, despite the central bank's efforts to control inflation.

Stock picks and investing trends from CNBC Pro:
Forget Nvidia? Fund manager says another chip firm is ‘the world's best business’

These stocks should let you 'sleep at night' during the market turmoil, Bank of America says

Every 'FAANG' stock is now in a bear market as Apple shares topple in rolling sell-off

Kristina Hooper, chief global market strategist at Invesco, told CNBC's "Squawk Box Europe" that she expected the Fed to announce a "few more 50-basis-point [interest rate] hikes in relatively close succession."

"But beyond that I actually anticipate the Fed will make another pivot and a get a bit more dovish," she added.

In terms of data releases due out on Friday, April's import and export prices are slated to come out at 8:30 a.m. ET.

The University of Michigan is then set to release its preliminary May consumer sentiment findings at 10 a.m. ET.

There are no auctions scheduled to held on Friday.

https://www.heritage.org/index/country/unitedstates

2022 Index of Economic Freedom
Country Rankings
Graph The Data
Interactive Heat Map
Explore The Data
Downloads
About The Index
United States
Previous: #24 United Kingdom
Next: #26 Georgia
OVERALL SCORE72.1
WORLD RANK25
Rule of Law
Property Rights95.7

Judicial Effectiveness77.9

Government Integrity75.7

Government Size
Tax Burden75.9

Government Spending54.5

Fiscal Health0.0

Regulatory Efficiency
Business Freedom87.5

Labor Freedom75.8

Monetary Freedom82.3

Open Markets
Trade Freedom75.2

Investment Freedom85.0

Financial Freedom80.0

Create a Comparison Chart
See how United States compares to another country using any of the measures in the Index.

vs
Close
Download PDF Quick Facts
Population:
329.5 million
GDP (PPP):
$20.9 trillion
-3.5% growth
1.1% 5-year compound annual growth
$63,416 per capita
Unemployment:
8.3%
Inflation (CPI):
1.2%
FDI Inflow:
$156.3 billion
The United States’ economic freedom score is 72.1, making its economy the 25th freest in the 2022 Index. The United States is ranked 3rd among 32 countries in the Americas region, and its overall score is above the regional and world averages.

The U.S. economy, which was growing moderately well before the COVID-19 pandemic, contracted sharply in 2020. Growth recovered in 2021. A decade-long trend of flagging economic freedom, interrupted briefly in 2019, has continued. Driven lower by a sharp decrease in its fiscal health score, the U.S. has recorded a 3.0-point overall loss of economic freedom since 2017 and has fallen from the upper half to the lower half of the “Mostly Free” category. Business freedom and rule of law are strong, but the economy is being crushed by reckless government overspending.

IMPACT OF COVID-19: As of December 1, 2021, 782,522 deaths had been attributed to the pandemic in the United States, and the government’s response to the crisis ranked 58th among the countries included in this Index in terms of its stringency. The economy contracted by 3.5 percent in 2020.

Close
Background
The United States has one of the world’s wealthiest and most diversified economies, led by a highly productive services sector, advanced manufacturing, and world-class research and development. The 2020 pandemic throttled relatively solid economic growth that had been stimulated by tax cuts and a lightened regulatory burden. Unfortunately, unchecked deficit spending and unprecedentedly accommodative monetary policy not only continued, but also accelerated in 2020 and 2021. Meanwhile, racial tensions and bitter political polarization aggravated by the pandemic have deepened, especially since the 2020 presidential election. Since assuming office in 2021 with narrow control of both houses of Congress, President Joseph Biden has pursued a radical left agenda aimed at fundamentally transforming both the country and the economy.

Rule of Law
Property Rights 95.7 Create a Graph using this measurement

Judicial Effectiveness 77.9 Create a Graph using this measurement

Government Integrity 75.7 Create a Graph using this measurement

Private property rights, secured interests, and contracts are protected and enforced. The judiciary is independent and reliable, although the judicial appointments process has become increasingly politicized. A troubling and growing tendency of federal governance by the unaccountable administrative state empowered by presidential decrees has undermined public confidence in the rule of law. Public perceptions of corruption and distrust of institutions have been rising in recent years.

Government Size
Tax Burden 75.9 Create a Graph using this measurement

Government Spending 54.5 Create a Graph using this measurement

Fiscal Health 0.0 Create a Graph using this measurement

The top individual income tax rate is 37 percent, and the top corporate tax rate is 21 percent. The overall tax burden equals 24.5 percent of total domestic income. Government spending has amounted to 38.9 percent of total output (GDP) over the past three years, and budget deficits have averaged 9.0 percent of GDP. Public debt is equivalent to 127.1 percent of GDP.

Regulatory Efficiency
Business Freedom 87.5 Create a Graph using this measurement

Labor Freedom 75.8 Create a Graph using this measurement

Monetary Freedom 82.3 Create a Graph using this measurement

The U.S. has a high level of business freedom, but regulations vary by state. The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 was a significant boost. Labor freedom is mostly high but varies from locality to locality. Massive government borrowing and the printing of money have been worsening inflation, with large deficits persisting and public debt growing. .

Open Markets
Trade Freedom 75.2 Create a Graph using this measurement

Investment Freedom 85.0 Create a Graph using this measurement

Financial Freedom 80.0 Create a Graph using this measurement

The United States has 14 preferential trade agreements in force with 20 countries. The trade-weighted average tariff rate is 2.4 percent, and more than 2,300 nontariff measures are in effect. In February 2020, the Foreign Investment Risk Review Modernization Act took effect, widening the mandate of the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States. The financial sector, one of the world’s most developed and competitive, continues to be resilient.

Country's Score Over Time View Chart of Scores over Time
Regional Ranking
RANK	COUNTRY	OVERALL	CHANGE
1	Canada	76.6	-1.3
2	Chile	74.4	-0.8
3	United States	72.1	-2.7
4	Barbados	71.3	6.3
5	Uruguay	70	0.7
6	The Bahamas	68.7	4.1
7	Jamaica	67.4	-1.6
8	Peru	66.5	-1.2
9	Saint Vincent and the Grenadines	65.7	-0.6
10	Costa Rica	65.4	1.2
11	Panama	65.4	-0.8
12	Colombia	65.1	-3.0
13	Saint Lucia	64.3	-3.2
14	Mexico	63.7	-1.8
15	Guatemala	63.2	-0.8
16	Dominican Republic	63	0.9
17	Paraguay	62.9	0.3
18	El Salvador	59.6	-1.4
19	Guyana	59.5	2.1
20	Honduras	59.5	-0.3
21	Trinidad and Tobago	58.8	-0.2
22	Belize	56.6	-0.9
23	Nicaragua	54.8	-1.5
24	Dominica	54.4	1.4
25	Ecuador	54.3	1.9
26	Brazil	53.3	-0.1
27	Argentina	50.1	-2.6
28	Haiti	50	-0.8
29	Suriname	48.1	1.7
30	Bolivia	43	0.3
31	Cuba	29.5	1.4
32	Venezuela	24.8	0.1
See Entire Region List ›

View all countries ›
© 2022 by The Heritage Foundation. All Rights Reserved.

https://www.theguardian.com/business/2022/may/11/us-inflation-consumer-price-index-figures

US economy
US inflation rate slows but remains close to 40-year high
Consumer price index reveals costs rising by a monthly rate of 0.3% in April, down from 1.2% in March, the first fall since August 2021

[Image: Grocery shoppers in Rosemead, California on 21 April 2022.]

Grocery shoppers in Rosemead, California, last month. Photograph: Frederic J Brown/AFP/Getty Images
Grocery shoppers in Rosemead, California, last month. Photograph: Frederic J Brown/AFP/Getty Images
Dominic Rushe in New York
@dominicru
Wed 11 May 2022 17.52 BST
First published on Wed 11 May 2022 13.41 BST
Price rises slowed in the US in April but the annual inflation rate remained close to a 40-year high, leaving many Americans struggling to afford necessities including food, shelter and fuel.

The latest consumer price index (CPI) figures – which measure a broad range of goods and services – showed prices rising by a monthly rate of 0.3% in April, down from 1.2% in March, the first fall since August 2021.

But it is still too early to say whether inflation has peaked. At 8.3% the annual rate of inflation in April was down from 8.5% in March but remains at a level unseen since the 1980s. Over the year the CPI’s food index increased 9.4%, the largest 12-month increase since April 1981. The so-called core-price index – which excludes the volatile categories of food and energy – increased 0.6% on the month, up from March’s 0.3% gain.

The figures come as the Federal Reserve is moving to sharply increase interest rates in an attempt to bring prices back under control. The pace of rate rises, and fears that they may trigger a recession, have spooked investors and sent stock markets reeling.

Soaring demand and a lack of supply thanks to the pandemic have led to price rises across a broad swath of goods and services. Air fares are up 40% over the last three months. A booming house market has made housing unaffordable for many Americans, especially people of color, and 49% of people recently told Pew Research that affordable housing is a large problem in their community.

Randall Kroszner, an economics professor at the University of Chicago and former Fed governor, said the sharp rise in core inflation would worry the Fed. “That is where you look for evidence that inflation is becoming entrenched,” he said.

Kroszner said global issues including the war in Ukraine and China’s Covid woes had combined with rising rates to deliver a “one-two punch” to the US economy. He believes the chances of the US entering a recession have risen and that the housing and jobs markets may be the next to suffer.

“I’m generally an optimist but this is challenging,” he said.

The rising cost of living has become a leading political issue as the US prepares for November’s midterm elections. Rising prices have battered Joe Biden’s approval ratings. This week an Investors Business Daily/TIPP poll found that Biden’s approval had fallen to 39%, approaching his previous record low of 38% set in February, and confidence in the US economy was close to an eight-year low.

On Tuesday, Biden said his administration was doing all it could to tackle inflation. “I want every American to know that I’m taking inflation very seriously,” he said in remarks from the White House. “It’s my top domestic priority.

The Biden administration has made attempts to bring down prices. In March the White House announced plans to release up to 1m barrels of oil a day from the strategic reserve, in an attempt to dampen high gasoline prices exacerbated by the war in Ukraine. But gas prices remain elevated at a national average of $4.37 a gallon compared with $2.96 a year ago, according to AAA.

Republicans have blamed Biden’s stimulus programs for rising prices, a claim he disputes. ​​ The president said his policies had “helped not hurt” the nation’s economic outlook.

MIT economics professor Kristin Forbes said the US recovery had shown the US economy lacked skilled workers in industries where demand for jobs was high, pushing up wages – a problem that also afflicted the UK in the wake of the pandemic.

The former Bank of England policymaker told a committee of MPs in the UK parliament that she expected inflation in the US to fall, especially once increases in borrowing costs feed through into more expensive mortgages and loans.

However, she said the UK faced an acute inflationary spiral that would continue into the autumn because Britain was the only country affected by all six drivers of global inflation. Inflation is running at 7% in the UK, but is forecast by the Bankto exceed 10% later this year.

She highlighted the impact on the UK of higher energy prices, a falling exchange rate, trade restrictions that pushed up goods prices, a decade of modest inflation going into the pandemic, expectations among businesses and consumers of much higher inflation in a year’s time and a tight labour market, forcing wages higher.

“The UK is the only country to tick every box with inflation pressures coming from all six areas,” she said.

https://www.bea.gov/news/2022/gross-domestic-product-first-quarter-2022-advance-estimate#:~:text=Real%20gross%20domestic%20product%20(GDP,real%20GDP%20increased%206.9%20percent.

EMBARGOED UNTIL RELEASE AT 8:30 A.M. EDT, Thursday, April 28, 2022
BEA 22–17
Gross Domestic Product, First Quarter 2022 (Advance Estimate)
Real gross domestic product (GDP) decreased at an annual rate of 1.4 percent in the first quarter of 2022 (table 1), according to the "advance" estimate released by the Bureau of Economic Analysis. In the fourth quarter, real GDP increased 6.9 percent.

The GDP estimate released today is based on source data that are incomplete or subject to further revision by the source agency (refer to "Source Data for the Advance Estimate" on page 3). The "second" estimate for the first quarter, based on more complete data, will be released on May 26, 2022

[Image: Real GDP: Percent change from preceding quarter]

The decrease in real GDP reflected decreases in private inventory investment, exports, federal government spending, and state and local government spending, while imports, which are a subtraction in the calculation of GDP, increased. Personal consumption expenditures (PCE), nonresidential fixed investment, and residential fixed investment increased (table 2).

COVID-19 Impact on the First-Quarter 2022 GDP Estimate
In the first quarter, an increase in COVID-19 cases related to the Omicron variant resulted in continued restrictions and disruptions in the operations of establishments in some parts of the country. Government assistance payments in the form of forgivable loans to businesses, grants to state and local governments, and social benefits to households all decreased as provisions of several federal programs expired or tapered off. The full economic effects of the COVID-19 pandemic cannot be quantified in the GDP estimate for the first quarter because the impacts are generally embedded in source data and cannot be separately identified. For more information, refer to the Technical Note and Federal Recovery Programs and BEA Statistics.
The decrease in private inventory investment was led by decreases in wholesale trade (mainly motor vehicles) and retail trade (notably, "other" retailers and motor vehicle dealers). Within exports, widespread decreases in nondurable goods were partly offset by an increase in "other" business services (mainly financial services). The decrease in federal government spending primarily reflected a decrease in defense spending on intermediate goods and services. The increase in imports was led by increases in durable goods (notably, nonfood and nonautomotive consumer goods).

The increase in PCE reflected an increase in services (led by health care) that was partly offset by a decrease in goods. Within goods, a decrease in nondurable goods (led by gasoline and other energy goods) was partly offset by an increase in durable goods (led by motor vehicles and parts). The increase in nonresidential fixed investment reflected increases in equipment and intellectual property products.

Current‑dollar GDP increased 6.5 percent at an annual rate, or $379.9 billion, in the first quarter to a level of $24.38 trillion. In the fourth quarter, GDP increased 14.5 percent, or $800.5 billion (table 1 and table 3).

The price index for gross domestic purchases increased 7.8 percent in the first quarter, compared with an increase of 7.0 percent in the fourth quarter (table 4). The PCE price index increased 7.0 percent, compared with an increase of 6.4 percent. Excluding food and energy prices, the PCE price index increased 5.2 percent, compared with an increase of 5.0 percent.

Personal Income

Current-dollar personal income increased $268.0 billion in the first quarter, compared with an increase of $123.9 billion in the fourth quarter. The increase primarily reflected an increase in compensation that was partly offset by a decrease in government social benefits (table 8). In the first quarter, government assistance payments in the form of social benefits to households decreased as provisions of several federal programs expired or continued to taper off.

Disposable personal income increased $216.6 billion, or 4.8 percent, in the first quarter, compared with an increase of $20.1 billion, or 0.4 percent, in the fourth quarter. Real disposable personal income decreased 2.0 percent, compared with a decrease of 5.6 percent.

Personal saving was $1.21 trillion in the first quarter, compared with $1.39 trillion in the fourth quarter. The personal saving rate—personal saving as a percentage of disposable personal income—was 6.6 percent in the first quarter, compared with 7.7 percent in the fourth quarter.

Source Data for the Advance Estimate
Information on the source data and key assumptions used in the advance estimate is provided in a Technical Note that is posted with the news release on BEA's website. A detailed "Key Source Data and Assumptions" file is also posted for each release. For information on updates to GDP, refer to the "Additional Information" section that follows.

Annual Update of the National Economic Accounts
BEA will release results from the 2022 annual update of the National Economic Accounts, which includes the National Income and Product Accounts as well as the Industry Economic Accounts, on September 29, 2022. This update will present revised statistics for GDP, GDP by Industry, and gross domestic income that cover the first quarter of 2017 through the first quarter of 2022. Refer to BEA's recent blog post, "National, Industry, and State Annual Updates Will Be United in 2022," for additional detail. More information on the 2022 annual update will be included on BEA's website as well as in a forthcoming Survey of Current Business article, "GDP and the Economy."

Next release, May 26, 2022, at 8:30 A.M. EDT
Gross Domestic Product (Second Estimate), Corporate Profits (Preliminary Estimate), First Quarter 2022

Full Release & Table (PDF) Technical Note (PDF) Tables Only (Excel) Release Highlights (PDF) Historical Comparisons (PDF) Key source data and assumptions (Excel) Effects of Selected Federal Pandemic Response Programs on Federal Government Receipts and Expenditures (PDF) Effects of Selected Federal Pandemic Response Programs on Federal Government Receipts and Expenditures (Excel) Effects of Selected Federal Pandemic Response Programs on Personal Income (PDF) Effects of Selected Federal Pandemic Response Programs on Personal Income (Excel) Revision Information
Technical
Karl Rohrer
(301) 278-9083
[email protected]
News Media
Jeannine Aversa
(301) 278-9003
[email protected]
Resources

Additional resources available at www.bea.gov:

Information on COVID-19 and recovery impacts is available on our website.
Stay informed about BEA developments by reading the BEA blog, signing up for BEA's email subscription service, or following BEA on Twitter @BEA_News.
Historical time series for these estimates can be accessed in BEA's interactive data application.
Access BEA data by registering for BEA's data application programming interface (API).
For more on BEA's statistics, refer to our monthly online journal, the Survey of Current Business.
BEA's news release schedule
NIPA Handbook:  Concepts and Methods of the U.S. National Income and Product Accounts
Definitions

Gross domestic product (GDP), or value added, is the value of the goods and services produced by the nation's economy less the value of the goods and services used up in production. GDP is also equal to the sum of personal consumption expenditures, gross private domestic investment, net exports of goods and services, and government consumption expenditures and gross investment.

Gross domestic income (GDI) is the sum of incomes earned and costs incurred in the production of GDP. In national economic accounting, GDP and GDI are conceptually equal. In practice, GDP and GDI differ because they are constructed using largely independent source data. 

Gross output is the value of the goods and services produced by the nation's economy. It is principally measured using industry sales or receipts, including sales to final users (GDP) and sales to other industries (intermediate inputs).

Current-dollar estimates are valued in the prices of the period when the transactions occurred—that is, at "market value." Also referred to as "nominal estimates" or as "current-price estimates."

Real values are inflation-adjusted estimates—that is, estimates that exclude the effects of price changes.

The gross domestic purchases price index measures the prices of final goods and services purchased by U.S. residents.

The personal consumption expenditure price index measures the prices paid for the goods and services purchased by, or on the behalf of, "persons."

Personal income is the income received by, or on behalf of, all persons from all sources:  from participation as laborers in production, from owning a home or business, from the ownership of financial assets, and from government and business in the form of transfers. It includes income from domestic sources as well as the rest of world. It does not include realized or unrealized capital gains or losses.

Disposable personal income is the income available to persons for spending or saving. It is equal to personal income less personal current taxes.

Personal outlays is the sum of personal consumption expenditures, personal interest payments, and personal current transfer payments.

Personal saving is personal income less personal outlays and personal current taxes.

The personal saving rate is personal saving as a percentage of disposable personal income.

Profits from current production, referred to as corporate profits with inventory valuation adjustment (IVA) and capital consumption (CCAdj) adjustment in the National Income and Product Accounts (NIPAs), is a measure of the net income of corporations before deducting income taxes that is consistent with the value of goods and services measured in GDP. The IVA and CCAdj are adjustments that convert inventory withdrawals and depreciation of fixed assets reported on a tax-return, historical-cost basis to the current-cost economic measures used in the national income and product accounts. Profits for domestic industries reflect profits for all corporations located within the geographic borders of the United States. The rest-of-the-world (ROW) component of profits is measured as the difference between profits received from ROW and profits paid to ROW.

For more definitions, refer to the Glossary: National Income and Product Accounts.

Statistical conventions

Annual-vs-quarterly rates. Quarterly seasonally adjusted values are expressed at annual rates, unless otherwise specified.  This convention is used for BEA's featured, seasonally adjusted measures to facilitate comparisons with related and historical data. For details, refer to the FAQ "Why does BEA publish estimates at annual rates?" Quarterly not seasonally adjusted values are expressed only at quarterly rates.

Percent changes. Percent changes in quarterly seasonally adjusted series are displayed at annual rates, unless otherwise specified. For details, refer to the FAQ "How is average annual growth calculated?" and "Why does BEA publish percent changes in quarterly series at annual rates?" Percent changes in quarterly not seasonally adjusted values are calculated from the same quarter one year ago. All published percent changes are calculated from unrounded data.

Calendar years and quarters. Unless noted otherwise, annual and quarterly data are presented on a calendar basis.

Quantities and prices. Quantities, or "real" volume measures, and prices are expressed as index numbers with a specified reference year equal to 100 (currently 2012). Quantity and price indexes are calculated using a Fisher-chained weighted formula that incorporates weights from two adjacent periods (quarters for quarterly data and annuals for annual data). For details on the calculation of quantity and price indexes, refer to Chapter 4: Estimating Methods in the NIPA Handbook.

Chained-dollar values are calculated by multiplying the quantity index by the current dollar value in the reference year (2012) and then dividing by 100. Percent changes calculated from real quantity indexes and chained-dollar levels are conceptually the same; any differences are due to rounding. Chained-dollar values are not additive because the relative weights for a given period differ from those of the reference year. In tables that display chained-dollar values, a "residual" line shows the difference between the sum of detailed chained-dollar series and its corresponding aggregate.

Updates to GDP

BEA releases three vintages of the current quarterly estimate for GDP: "Advance" estimates are released near the end of the first month following the end of the quarter and are based on source data that are incomplete or subject to further revision by the source agency; "second" and "third" estimates are released near the end of the second and third months, respectively, and are based on more detailed and more comprehensive data as they become available.

The table below shows the average revisions to the quarterly percent changes in real GDP between different estimate vintages, without regard to sign.

Vintage	Average Revision
Without Regard to Sign
(percentage points, annual rates)
Advance to second	0.5
Advance to third	0.6
Second to third	0.3
Note - Based on estimates from 1996 through 2020. For more information on GDP updates, refer to Revision Information on the BEA Website.
Annual and comprehensive updates are typically released in late July. Annual updates generally cover at least the 5 most recent calendar years (and their associated quarters) and incorporate newly available major annual source data as well as some changes in methods and definitions to improve the accounts. Comprehensive (or benchmark) updates are carried out at about 5-year intervals and incorporate major periodic source data, as well as major conceptual improvements.

Unlike GDP, advance current quarterly estimates of GDI and corporate profits are not released because data on domestic profits and on net interest of domestic industries are not available. For fourth quarter estimates, these data are not available until the third estimate.

GDP by industry and gross output estimates are released with the third estimate of GDP.

https://www.nytimes.com/2022/05/11/business/economy/april-2022-cpi.html

Consumer Prices Are Still Climbing Rapidly
Inflation data showed a slowdown in annual price increases in April, but a closely watched monthly price measure continues to rise at an uncomfortably brisk rate.

By Jeanna Smialek

May 11, 2022

The pressures that have kept inflation elevated for months remain strong, fresh data released Wednesday showed, a challenge for households that are trying to shoulder rising expenses and for the White House and Federal Reserve as they try to put the economy on a steadier path.

Annual inflation moderated for the first time in months in April, but the Consumer Price Index still increased 8.3 percent, an uncomfortably rapid pace. At the same time, a closely watched measure that subtracts food and fuel costs actually accelerated.

Core inflation — which excludes costs for groceries and gas — picked up 0.6 percent in April from the prior month, faster than its 0.3 percent increase in March. That measure is particularly important for policymakers, who use it as a gauge to help determine where inflation is headed.

While the letup in annual inflation may have given President Biden and the Fed a dose of comfort, the overall picture remains worrying. Policymakers have a long way to go to bring price increases down to more normal and stable levels, and the newest data is likely to keep them focused on trying to slow an inflation rate that remains near its fastest pace in 40 years.

“Inflation is too high — they need to bring it down,” said Laura Rosner-Warburton, senior economist at MacroPolicy Perspectives. “The re-acceleration in core inflation is unwelcome.”

The report renewed fears among investors that the Fed could speed up plans to raise interest rates, which would further take steam out of the stock market. The S&P 500 fell 1.6 percent, extending a five-week slide that has taken it to the cusp of a so-called bear market — a drop of more than 20 percent from a recent peak. At the close of trading, the index was 18 percent below its January record high. The tech-heavy Nasdaq composite, which has been in a bear market for months, fell 3.2 percent.

Annual inflation may have now peaked, having climbed by an even-quicker 8.5 percent in March. It slowed down in April partly because gas prices dropped lower, and partly because of a statistical quirk that will continue through the months ahead. Yearly price changes are now being measured against elevated price readings from last spring, when inflation started to take off. The higher base makes annual increases look less severe.

A Higher Baseline for Inflation
Prices rose significantly last spring, so the increase now from the year prior is starting from a higher baseline.

Still, even the White House greeted the new report with concern.

“While it is heartening to see that annual inflation moderated in April, the fact remains that inflation is unacceptably high,” Mr. Biden said in a statement. “Inflation is a challenge for families across the country, and bringing it down is my top economic priority.”

Economists do expect price increases to continue to ebb somewhat this year, because they think that consumer demand will taper off and that supply chain stresses will ease. The crucial question is how much and how quickly that moderation might happen.

Understand Inflation and How It Impacts You
Inflation 101: What is inflation, why is it up and whom does it hurt? Our guide explains it all.
Inflation Calculator: How you experience inflation can vary greatly depending on your spending habits. Answer these seven questions to estimate your personal inflation rate.
Interest Rates: As it seeks to curb inflation, the Federal Reserve began raising interest rates for the first time since 2018. Here is what the increases mean for consumers.
State Intervention: As inflation stays high, lawmakers across the country are turning to tax cuts to ease the pain, but the measures could make things worse. 
How Americans Feel: We asked 2,200 people where they’ve noticed inflation. Many mentioned basic necessities, like food and gas.
Many analysts have been predicting a slowdown in price increases or even outright price cuts on many goods, but those forecasts look increasingly uncertain. Lockdowns in China and the war in Ukraine threaten to exacerbate supply shortages for semiconductor chips, commodities and other important products.

“There are persistent issues in supply chains,” said Matthew Luzzetti, chief U.S. economist at Deutsche Bank. “And the most recent developments have not been positive.”

The path ahead for the car market, for instance, remains unclear. Supply shortfalls for used vehicles show some signs of easing, but shortfalls persist in computer chips, which are crucial to automobile production. As a result, companies are still struggling to complete vehicles.

Prices for used cars and trucks declined in April from the prior month, though the drop was smaller than the one in March. While car parts had become cheaper in March, they resumed their monthly increase in April. New car prices also accelerated after a lull, climbing 1.7 percent from the prior month.

Image
[Image: Dining outdoors in Brooklyn last week. Inflation is still running at around the fastest rate in four decades, including steeper prices for services like restaurant meals.]

Credit...OK McCausland for The New York Times
And services prices are now increasing quickly, as rents climb and as worker shortfalls lead to higher wages and steeper prices for restaurant meals and other labor-intensive purchases. If that continues, it could keep inflation elevated even as supply problems are resolved.

Rents picked up by 0.6 percent in April from March, and a measure of housing costs that uses rents to estimate the cost of owned housing climbed 0.5 percent, up from 0.4 percent the prior month. The pickup in housing costs is particularly important, because they make up about a third of the overall inflation index.

“Domestically generated inflationary pressures remain strong,” Andrew Hunter, senior U.S. economist at Capital Economics, wrote after the report was released.

Part of the increase in core inflation in April owed to trends that should not last, most notably a big pop in airfares as travel demand surges after the latest wave of the coronavirus. Even so, Ms. Rosner-Warburton said she expected annual C.P.I. inflation to remain 5.1 percent at the end of the year, far above levels that prevailed before the pandemic.

Inflation F.A.Q.
Card 1 of 5
What is inflation? Inflation is a loss of purchasing power over time, meaning your dollar will not go as far tomorrow as it did today. It is typically expressed as the annual change in prices for everyday goods and services such as food, furniture, apparel, transportation and toys.

The Fed aims for 2 percent annual inflation on average, though it defines that goal using a related but different measure that tends to run slightly lower and comes out with more of a delay. That inflation index picked up by 6.6 percent over the year through March, and April figures will be released later this month.

The fact that high inflation is lasting so long is a problem for the central bank. After a full year of unusually swift increases, household and investor expectations for future price changes have been creeping higher, which could perpetuate inflation if households and businesses adjust their behavior, asking for bigger raises and charging more for goods and services.

As such risks have mounted, the Fed has begun to lift interest rates to try to keep price increases from galloping out of control in a more lasting way. In March, Fed policymakers lifted their main policy interest rate for the first time since 2018, then followed that up with the biggest increase since 2000 at their meeting last week.

By making it more expensive to borrow money, officials hope to weaken spending and hiring, which could help supply to catch up with demand. As the economy returns to balance, inflation should come down.

Central bankers are hoping that their policies will temper economic growth without pushing unemployment up or plunging America into a recession — engineering what they often call a “soft landing.”

“I really want us to have that be the outcome, but I recognize that it’s not going to be easy to do,” Raphael Bostic, the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, said in an interview on Monday.

Officials have roundly acknowledged that letting the economy down gently will be difficult, and some have suggested that they would be willing to inflict economic pain if that was what it took to tackle high inflation.

If the economy gets to a point where unemployment begins climbing but inflation remains “unacceptably high,” Mr. Bostic said, price increases will be “the threat that we have to take on board.”

One challenge for policymakers — and even more for families — is that price increases are surfacing in essentials. Food costs rose 0.9 percent in April from the previous month, the 17th consecutive monthly increase, Wednesday’s report showed.

The increase was driven by dairy, nonalcoholic beverages and a 10.3 percent monthly increase in the cost of eggs, as avian flu decimated poultry flocks. Such inflation tends to especially hit the poor, who spend a bigger chunk of their budgets on needs like groceries and gas.

But as Americans see strong job gains and strong wage growth — albeit not strong enough to fully counteract inflation — many are managing to shoulder the rising costs for now, keeping overall demand strong.

“Consumers appear willing to accept the higher menu prices, particularly as inflation is broad,” George Holm, chief executive officer at the food distributor and restaurant supplier Performance Food Group, said on an earnings call Wednesday. “Still, this is something to closely monitor across the next few months and quarters.”

Ana Swanson contributed reporting.
